docs: coordinated workers doc (#295)
canonical/observability-stack: docs/explanation/architecture/coordinated-workers.md

---
myst:
 html_meta:

>   description: "Explanation of the coordinator-worker pattern used in COS HA for Loki, Mimir, and Tempo: how it works, its components, and why it was chosen."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: "Explanation of the coordinated-workers pattern used in COS charms for Loki, Mimir, and Tempo: how it works, its components, and why it was chosen."
```

---

> # Coordinated workers

Reviewer 2: "Coordinated workers architecture in COS HA" ? Or "Coordinated worker pattern in COS HA" ? Does something like that work instead

I was suggesting something else because 
1. just "Coordinated workers" isn't that clear to me what it is or why it's in the Explanation > Architecture
2. It's not clear upfront that the contents in the doc are more for COS HA (not COS Lite). COS Lite is mentioned at the top with "monolithic mode", but it's not elaborated on

Author: Changed to "description: "Architecture of the coordinated-workers pattern used in COS HA for Loki, Mimir, and Tempo: how it works, its components, and why it was chosen.""

> 

Reviewer 2: Something before Overview, such as:

"In COS HA, Mimir, Loki, and Tempo are deployed as multiple Juju applications instead of single monolithic applications. Each backend has a coordinator application and one or more worker applications. The coordinator handles integrations, configurations, and routes traffic, while workers run the backend services needed for ingestion, querying, storage, and background processing.

This guide explains the coordinator-worker pattern in COS HA."

Author: Agreed, I like this intro. I've added it!

## Overview

> The telemetry backend components in the COS stack (namely Loki, Mimir, and Tempo) are built on top of a single executable that can operate in two modes:

Reviewer 3: This is not necessarily true. For Loki yes, but Mimir and Tempo; no.

Reviewer: - Iirc, mimir has role-all?
- Maybe we could emphasize that it's how we chose to model grafana's "multi-roled single binary" in juju.
- We could add a link to upstream arch doc, e.g. [mimir](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/get-started/about-grafana-mimir-architecture/).

- Monolithic mode: a single process runs all internal services. This is the mode that is used in COS Lite, where Prometheus and Loki each run as one service.
- Microservices mode: multiple processes each run a subset of services, known as *roles*.

> The coordinated workers pattern is the design that COS HA (sometimes referred to as simply COS) uses to deploy these components in microservices mode, providing the high-availability (HA) topology of COS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Roles and meta-roles

In microservices mode, each process runs one or more *roles*. How roles are distributed varies by product:

- Mimir: each process runs an arbitrary subset of roles, or one of several predefined subsets.
- Loki: each process runs one of three predefined role subsets.

> - Tempo: each process runs exactly one role.

Reviewer 3: This does not really offer much insight and is words for the sake of words IMHO. To me as the reader it is not clear what this means, and I actually understand how coordinated-workers work. Imagine someone coming here for the first time.

> Loki: each process runs one of three predefined role subsets.

For example, which roles? Why did we choose to do this? etc. is more valuable to me.

Reviewer: Agreed, it's too abstract, and redundant.

> Predefined subsets of roles are called *meta-roles*. A deployment is considered *consistent* when all roles required for the product to function are covered by at least one running process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## The coordinator-worker pattern

> Each COS HA component is made up of exactly two charms:

Reviewer 2: "exactly" - is this accurate though? From below and the diagram (IIRC), it sees like there's one coordinator and can be more than one worker

Author: Ah, I get your point. We have **exactly** two **kinds** of charms, not two charms. Leon suggested "Mimir, Loki and Tempo are charmed using two distinct charms:" and it LGTM. I think I'll change it to this.

> Each COS HA component is made up of exactly two charms:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mimir, Loki and Tempo are charmed using two distinct charms:
```

> 1. A coordinator charm, which acts as the single entrypoint for all communication with the cluster. It runs an nginx reverse proxy to route and load-balance requests across workers, verifies that the cluster is consistent (i.e. all required roles are deployed), and owns all rule files and dashboards. It also handles integration with the rest of COS. As a result, individual workers do not need to be related to other charms directly. The coordinator, based on its relations and current config options, determines the necessary workload config file that the workers must run and forwards it to them over relation data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. A **coordinator charm**, which acts as the single entrypoint for all communication with the cluster. It runs an nginx reverse proxy to route and load-balance requests across workers, verifies that the cluster is consistent (i.e. all required roles are deployed), and owns all rule files and dashboards. It also handles integration with the rest of COS. As a result, individual workers do not need to be related to other charms directly. The coordinator, based on its relations and current config options, determines the necessary workload config file that the workers must run and forwards it to them over relation data.
```

> 1. A worker charm, which runs one or more roles as configured by the operator via a config option. Multiple worker applications can be deployed with different roles to compose a full cluster. This charm runs the appropriate workload container based on the config file it receives from its coordinator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. A **worker charm**, which runs one or more roles as configured by the operator via a config option. Multiple worker applications can be deployed with different roles to compose a full cluster. This charm runs the appropriate workload container based on the config file it receives from its coordinator.
```

> 1. A worker charm, which runs one or more roles as configured by the operator via a config option. Multiple worker applications can be deployed with different roles to compose a full cluster. This charm runs the appropriate workload container based on the config file it receives from its coordinator.

Reviewer: Unclear if `operator` is charm or admin. Change to `admin`?

```suggestion
1. A worker charm, which runs one or more roles as configured by the admin via a charm config option. All units of a worker charm will have the exact same role(s). Multiple worker applications can be deployed with different roles to make a full cluster.
```

```{mermaid}
graph LR

subgraph mimir
mimir-write ---|mimir-cluster| coordinator
mimir-read ---|mimir-cluster| coordinator
mimir-backend ---|mimir-cluster| coordinator
end

subgraph cos
coordinator ---|alertmanager_dispatch| alertmanager
coordinator ---|grafana_dashboards| grafana
coordinator ---|ingress| Traefik
end
```

> Worker roles are set via a config option on the worker application. Boolean per-role config variables (e.g. `role-ingester`, `role-querier`) are used rather than a free-text field, so that Juju can validate the input and prevent misconfiguration from typos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Worker roles are set via a charm config option on the worker application. Boolean per-role config variables (e.g. `role-ingester`, `role-querier`) are used as additive toggles.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: You should add something to cross-link to the reference, like "For a full list of roles available in charmed Mimir, Loki, and Tempo, see {reference doc link}"

## Why a coordinator?

The coordinator solves several problems that would otherwise require complex distributed coordination among workers:

> - Single entrypoint: all traffic flows through the coordinator's nginx reverse proxy, which load-balances across workers of the same role.

Reviewer: Should probably mention that having nginx in the mix is a Grafana Labs original design

- Cleaner Juju topology: integrations with other charms (e.g. S3, alerting rules, dashboards) are established once on the coordinator, which then distributes the relevant configuration to workers.
- Consistency checking: the coordinator can verify that the cluster has all required roles covered before marking the deployment as ready, without requiring workers to cross-relate with each other.

## Status and health checks

> Both the coordinator and the worker report their health through Juju's `collect-status` event, which aggregates multiple status conditions and surfaces the most critical one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Worker health

Each worker tracks the health of its workload process through a pebble readiness check. When a readiness check endpoint is configured, the worker periodically GETs it and interprets the response:

- A `"ready"` response body (with any 2xx status code) means the worker is `up`.
- A 2xx response with any other body means the worker is still `starting` (e.g. waiting for peer workers to become available).
- An HTTP error or connection failure means the worker is `down`.

This three-state model (`starting` / `up` / `down`) is used internally by the worker to decide whether a restart is needed and to populate the Juju unit status.

When collecting unit status, the worker checks conditions in order of priority and reports the first applicable one:

| Condition | Status |
|---|---|
| Pebble container not reachable | `waiting` |
| No relation to a coordinator | `blocked` |
| Cluster relation not ready | `waiting` |
| No config published by coordinator | `waiting` |
| No roles assigned | `blocked` |
| Workload starting or down | `waiting` |

> | All roles running | `active` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Coordinator health

Reviewer 2: IMO this section isn't clear about what blocked or waiting statuses actually mean (i.e., what is it "waiting" for? for roles to be reported to the app?)

Author: Based on Leon's suggestion, I've removed this section altogether, so it's not a concern anymore :blush:

The coordinator distinguishes between two levels of cluster completeness:

- Coherent (minimal deployment): all roles in the `minimal_deployment` set are covered by at least one worker. Below this threshold the cluster cannot function and the coordinator reports `blocked`.
- Recommended (robust deployment): all roles in the `recommended_deployment` set are covered with the suggested number of units. Below this threshold the cluster can function but is degraded, and the coordinator reports a `waiting` or degraded status.

The coordinator also blocks or waits on its own prerequisites:

| Condition | Status |
|---|---|
| No workers related | `blocked` |
| Cluster not coherent (missing required roles) | `blocked` |
| Cluster not at recommended deployment | `waiting` (degraded) |
| No S3 relation | `blocked` |
| S3 relation not ready | `waiting` |
| All checks pass | `active` |

> Because the coordinator owns the workload config and forwards it to workers over the cluster relation, a worker that has not yet received its config will remain in `waiting` until the coordinator becomes ready and publishes it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
myst:
 html_meta:
  description: "Architecture of the coordinated-workers pattern used in COS HA for Loki, Mimir, and Tempo: how it works, its components, and why it was chosen."
---

# Coordinated workers

In COS HA, Mimir, Loki, and Tempo are deployed as multiple Juju applications instead of single monolithic applications. Each backend has a coordinator application and one or more worker applications. The coordinator handles integrations, configurations, and routes traffic, while workers run the backend services needed for ingestion, querying, storage, and background processing.

This guide explains the coordinator-worker pattern in COS HA.

## Overview

The telemetry backend components in the COS stack (namely Loki, Mimir, and Tempo) are built on top of a single executable that can operate in two modes:

- Monolithic mode: a single process runs all internal services. This is the mode that is used in COS Lite, where Prometheus and Loki each run as one service.
- Microservices mode: multiple processes each run a subset of services. Grafana Labs calls these subsets *roles*, with named groupings called *meta-roles*.

## The coordinator-worker pattern

> Mimir, Loki and Tempo are charmed using two distinct charms:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mimir, Loki and Tempo are charmed using two distinct types of charms:
```
This is more precise (if you can have multiple worker charms)

1. A **coordinator charm**, which acts as the single entrypoint for all communication with the cluster. It runs an nginx reverse proxy (as per Grafana Labs' original design for these services) to route and load-balance requests across workers, verifies that the cluster is consistent (i.e. all required roles are deployed), and owns all rule files and dashboards. It also handles integration with the rest of COS. As a result, individual workers do not need to be related to other charms directly. The coordinator, based on its relations and current config options, determines the necessary workload config file that the workers must run and forwards it to them over relation data.

> 1. A worker charm, which runs one or more roles as configured by the admin via a charm config option. All units of a worker charm will have the exact same role(s). Multiple worker applications can be deployed with different roles to make a full cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. A **worker charm**, which runs one or more roles as configured by the admin via a charm config option. All units of a worker charm will have the exact same role(s). Multiple worker applications can be deployed with different roles to make a full cluster.
```
To match the other one

end

subgraph cos
coordinator ---|alertmanager_dispatch| alertmanager
coordinator ---|grafana_dashboards| grafana
coordinator ---|ingress| Traefik
end
```

Worker roles are set via a charm config option on the worker application. Boolean per-role config variables (e.g. `role-ingester`, `role-querier`) are used as additive toggles. For a full list of roles available in charmed Mimir, Loki, and Tempo, see the [Meta-roles used in COS doc](/reference/coordinated-workers-meta-roles.md).

## Why a coordinator?

The coordinator solves several problems that would otherwise require complex distributed coordination among workers:

- Single entrypoint: all traffic flows through the coordinator's nginx reverse proxy, which load-balances across workers of the same role.
- Cleaner Juju topology: integrations with other charms (e.g. S3, alerting rules, dashboards) are established once on the coordinator, which then distributes the relevant configuration to workers.
- Consistency checking: the coordinator can verify that the cluster has all required roles covered before marking the deployment as ready, without requiring workers to cross-relate with each other.

## References

> - [Meta-roles used in COS](/reference/coordinated-workers-meta-roles.md)

Reviewer 2: Any reason why you didn't match the name with the heading?

If not, then I'd suggest you match it exactly. At first pass, if you click that, you'd expect the title will be called "Meta-roles [something]", so it's easy to think the link was wrong
